<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Hsin Hsin Ming</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">The Great Way is not dif­fi­cult<br/>
		for those who have no pref­er­ences.<br/>
		When love and hate are both ab­sent<br/>
		ev­ery­thing be­comes clear and undis­guised.<br/>
		Make the small­est dis­tinc­tion, how­ev­er,<br/>
		and heav­en and earth are set in­fin­ite­ly apart.<br/>
		<br/>
		If you wish to see the truth<br/>
		then hold no opin­ions for or against any­thing.<br/>
		To set up what you like against what you dis­like<br/>
		is the dis­ease of the mind.<br/>
		When the deep mean­ing of things is not un­der­stood,<br/>
		the mind’s es­sen­tial peace is dis­turbed to no avail.<br/>
		<br/>
		The Way is per­fect like vast space<br/>
		where noth­ing is lack­ing and noth­ing in ex­cess.<br/>
		In­deed, it is due to our choos­ing to ac­cept or re­ject<br/>
		that we do not see the true na­ture of things.<br/>
		<br/>
		Live nei­ther in the en­tan­gle­ments of out­er things,<br/>
		nor in in­ner feel­ings of empti­ness.<br/>
		Be serene in the one­ness of things and such<br/>
		er­ro­neous views will dis­ap­pear by them­selves.<br/>
		<br/>
		When you try to stop ac­tiv­i­ty by pas­siv­i­ty<br/>
		your very ef­fort fills you with ac­tiv­i­ty.<br/>
		As long as you re­main in one ex­treme or the oth­er<br/>
		you will nev­er know One­ness.<br/>
		<br/>
		Those who do not live in the sin­gle Way<br/>
		fail in both ac­tiv­i­ty and pas­siv­i­ty,<br/>
		as­ser­tion and de­nial.<br/>
		To de­ny the re­al­i­ty of things<br/>
		is to miss their re­al­i­ty;<br/>
		To as­sert the empti­ness of things<br/>
		is to miss their re­al­i­ty.<br/>
		<br/>
		The more you talk and think about it,<br/>
		the fur­ther astray you wan­der from the truth.<br/>
		Stop talk­ing and think­ing,<br/>
		and there is noth­ing you will not be able to know.<br/>
		<br/>
		To re­turn to the root is to find mean­ing,<br/>
		but to pur­sue ap­pear­ances is to miss the source.<br/>
		At the mo­ment of in­ner en­light­en­ment<br/>
		there is a go­ing be­yond ap­pear­ance and empti­ness.<br/>
		The changes that ap­pear to oc­cur in the emp­ty world<br/>
		we call re­al on­ly be­cause of our ig­no­rance.<br/>
		<br/>
		Do not search for the truth;<br/>
		on­ly cease to cher­ish opin­ions.<br/>
		do not re­main in the du­al­is­tic state.<br/>
		Avoid such pur­suits care­ful­ly.<br/>
		If there is even a trace of this and that,<br/>
		of right and wrong,<br/>
		the mind-essence ewill be lost in con­fu­sion.<br/>
		<br/>
		Al­though all du­al­i­ties come from the One,<br/>
		do not be at­tached even to this One.<br/>
		When the mind ex­ists undis­turbed in the Way,<br/>
		noth­ing in the world can of­fend.<br/>
		And when a thing can no longer of­fend,<br/>
		it ceas­es to ex­ist in the old way.<br/>
		<br/>
		When no dis­crim­i­nat­ing thoughts arise,<br/>
		the old mind ceas­es to ex­ist.<br/>
		When thought ob­jects van­ish,<br/>
		the think­ing-sub­ject van­ish­es:<br/>
		As when the mind van­ish­es, ob­jects van­ish.<br/>
		<br/>
		Things are ob­jects be­cause of the sub­ject (mind):<br/>
		the mind (sub­ject) is such be­cause of things (ob­ject).<br/>
		Un­der­stand the rel­a­tiv­i­ty of these two<br/>
		and the ba­sic re­al­i­ty: the uni­ty of empti­ness.<br/>
		In this Empti­ness the two are in­dis­tin­guish­able<br/>
		and each con­tains in it­self the whole world.<br/>
		If you do not dis­crim­i­nate be­tween coarse and fine<br/>
		you will not be tempt­ed to prej­u­dice and opin­ion.<br/>
		<br/>
		To live in the Great Way is nei­ther easy nor dif­fi­cult.<br/>
		But those with lim­it­ed views are fear­ful and ir­res­o­lute:<br/>
		the faster they hur­ry, the slow­er they go.<br/>
		And cling­ing (at­tach­ment) can­not be lim­it­ed:<br/>
		Even to be at­tached to the idea of en­light­en­ment<br/>
		is to go astray.<br/>
		Just let things be in their own way<br/>
		and there will be nei­ther com­ing not go­ing.<br/>
		Obey the na­ture of things (your own na­ture)<br/>
		and you will walk freely and undis­turbed.<br/>
		<br/>
		When the thought is in bondage the truth is hid­den<br/>
		for ev­ery­thing is murky and un­clear.<br/>
		And the bur­den­some prac­tice of judg­ing<br/>
		brings an­noy­ance and weari­ness.<br/>
		What ben­e­fit can be de­rived<br/>
		from dis­tinc­tions and sep­a­ra­tions?<br/>
		<br/>
		If you wish to move in the One Way<br/>
		do not dis­like even the world of sens­es and ideas.<br/>
		In­deed, to ac­cept them ful­ly<br/>
		is iden­ti­cal with en­light­en­ment.<br/>
		<br/>
		The wise man strives to no goals<br/>
		but the fool­ish man fet­ters him­self.<br/>
		<br/>
		There is one Dhar­ma, not many.<br/>
		Dis­tinc­tions arise<br/>
		from the cling­ing needs of the ig­no­rant.<br/>
		To seek Mind with the (dis­crim­i­nat­ing) mind<br/>
		is the great­est of all mis­takes.<br/>
		<br/>
		Rest and un­rest de­rive from il­lu­sion;<br/>
		with en­light­en­ment<br/>
		there is no lik­ing and dis­lik­ing.<br/>
		All du­al­i­ties come from ig­no­rant in­fer­ence.<br/>
		They are like dreams or flow­ers in air -<br/>
		fool­ish to try to grasp them.<br/>
		Gain and loss, right and wrong,<br/>
		such thoughts must<br/>
		fi­nal­ly be abol­ished at once.<br/>
		<br/>
		If the eye nev­er sleeps,<br/>
		all dreams will nat­u­ral­ly cease.<br/>
		If the mind makes no dis­crim­i­na­tions,<br/>
		the ten thou­sand things are as they are,<br/>
		of sin­gle essence.<br/>
		To un­der­stand the mys­tery of this One-essence<br/>
		is to be re­leased from all en­tan­gle­ments.<br/>
		When all things are seen equal­ly<br/>
		the time­less Self-essence is reached,<br/>
		No com­par­isons or analo­gies are pos­si­ble<br/>
		in this cause­less, re­la­tion­less state.<br/>
		Con­sid­er move­ment sta­tion­ary<br/>
		and the sta­tion­ary in mo­tion,<br/>
		both move­ment and rest dis­ap­pear.<br/>
		When such du­al­i­ties cease to ex­ist<br/>
		One­ness it­self can­not ex­ist.<br/>
		To this ul­ti­mate fi­nal­i­ty<br/>
		no law or de­scrip­tion ap­plies.<br/>
		<br/>
		For the uni­fied mind in ac­cord with the way<br/>
		all self-cen­tered striv­ing ceas­es.<br/>
		Doubts and ir­res­o­lu­tions van­ish<br/>
		and life in true faith is pos­si­ble.<br/>
		With a sin­gle stroke we are freed from bondage:<br/>
		Noth­ing clings to us and we hold to noth­ing.<br/>
		<br/>
		All is emp­ty, clear, self-il­lu­mi­nat­ing,<br/>
		with no ex­er­tion of the mind’s pow­er.<br/>
		Here thought, feel­ing,<br/>
		knowl­edge and imag­i­na­tion are of no val­ue.<br/>
		<br/>
		In this world of such­ness<br/>
		there is nei­ther self nor oth­er-than-self.<br/>
		To come di­rect­ly in­to har­mo­ny with this re­al­i­ty<br/>
		just say when doubt ris­es “not two.”<br/>
		In this “not two” noth­ing is sep­a­rate,<br/>
		noth­ing is ex­clud­ed.<br/>
		<br/>
		No mat­ter when or where,<br/>
		en­light­en­ment means en­ter­ing this truth.<br/>
		And this truth is be­yond ex­ten­sion<br/>
		or diminu­tion in time and space:<br/>
		In it a sin­gle thought is ten thou­sand years.<br/>
		<br/>
		Empti­ness here, empti­ness there,<br/>
		but the in­fi­nite uni­verse<br/>
		stands al­ways be­fore your eyes.<br/>
		In­fin­ite­ly large and in­fin­ite­ly small;<br/>
		no dif­fer­ence, for def­i­ni­tions have van­ished<br/>
		and no bound­aries are seen.<br/>
		<br/>
		So too with Be­ing and non-Be­ing.<br/>
		Don’t waste time in doubts and ar­gu­ments<br/>
		That have noth­ing to do with this.<br/>
		<br/>
		One thing, all things,<br/>
		move among and in­ter­min­gle with­out dis­tinc­tion.<br/>
		To live in this re­al­iza­tion<br/>
		is to be with­out anx­i­ety about non-per­fec­tion.<br/>
		To live in this faith is the road to non-du­al­i­ty,<br/>
		be­cause the non-du­al is one with the trust­ing mind.<br/>
		<br/>
		Words!<br/>
		The Way is be­yond lan­guage,<br/>
		for in it there is<br/>
		no yes­ter­day<br/>
		no to­mor­row<br/>
		no to­day.<br/>
		<br/>
		~ Seng T’san, the third Zen Pa­tri­arch<br/>
		Trans­lat­ed from the Chi­nese by Richard B. Clarke</section>
	</body>
</html>
